---
layout: post
title: Section 1.1
date: 2011-06-14 13:00:00 +00:00
categories:
  - sicp
  - scheme
  - lisp
---

I had never done any LISP before. Actually, I had never done any funtional programming at all... That's the main reason I started SICP. I think it is important to try new languages and to learn new programming paradigms.

[Section 1.1](http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/full-text/book/book-Z-H-10.html#%_sec_1.1) starts explaining the three mechanisms every powerful language should have to help you organize your ideas about the process you are creating:

- **Primitive expressions**, which represent the simplest entities the language is concerned with,
- **Means of combination**, by which compound elements are built from simpler ones, and
- **Means of abstraction**, by which compound elements can be named and manipulated as units.

I never though about it, but this is a simple way to understand a language. Understand how to create the simplest entities, understand how to compound elements and how to name them... Is there anything else? Well, yes. There are a lot of things more, but this is sufficient to understand how a language works.

Based on those mechanisms, the authors guide us through the basics of LISP in a very easy way. We learn how to create numbers, combinations of numbers (adding, substracting, etc), how to name entities and procedures, how to create conditional expressions and a little bit about how the environment works.

The authors also introduce us to the concept of black-box abstraction: implementation details are not important for the user of the abstraction.

**Exercises**
Every concept in this section is explained with an example, but the authors propose some exercises for the student. If you want to have a look at how I resolved them, visit [my Github repository for this study group](http://github.com/plagelao/SICP/tree/master/exercises/chapter-1).

Please, share your thoughts and correct me if I'm wrong.

See you next week!
